\input{labspre.tex}

\usepackage[compact]{titlesec}

\begin{document}
\MYTITLE{Laboratory Assignment Two: Performance Evaluation of Using Arrays and Iteration}
\MYHEADERS{Laboratory Assignment Two}{Due: September 19, 2016}

\section*{Introduction}

The Java programming language provides facilities for you to store many values of the same type and to ``iterate''
through those values using iteration constructs like a {\tt for} loop. In this laboratory assignment, you will review
the use of arrays and iteration constructs in the Java programming language. You will also practice the debugging of
programs that use arrays and {\tt for} loops. Finally, you will continue to conduct experiments to evaluate the
performance of Java programs.

\section*{Reading Assignment}

To start your review of the key features of the Java programming language, please study the material in Chapter 1 of the
textbook, paying particularly close attention to the content about iteration and input and output in Sections 1.5 and
1.6. Please also review the slides that we have discussed during our recent class sessions. If you have questions about
this reading assignment or the material that was presented in class, then please see the course instructor or a teaching
assistant. If done appropriately, you may also post your question to our Slack team.

\section*{Compiling, Running, and Repairing a Java Program}

\vspace*{-.11in}
\subsubsection*{Carefully Review the Honor Code}

The Academic Honor Program that governs the entire academic program at Allegheny College is described in the Allegheny
Academic Bulletin.  The Honor Program applies to all work that is submitted for academic credit or to meet non-credit
requirements for graduation at Allegheny College.  This includes all work assigned for this class (e.g., examinations,
  laboratory assignments, and the final project).  All students who have enrolled in the College will work under the Honor
Program.  Each student who has matriculated at the College has acknowledged the following pledge:

\vspace*{-.05in}
\begin{quote}
  I hereby recognize and pledge to fulfill my responsibilities, as defined in the Honor Code, and to maintain the
  integrity of both myself and the College community as a whole.
\end{quote}
\vspace*{-.05in}

\noindent It is understood that an important part of the learning process in any course, and particularly one in
computer science, derives from thoughtful discussions with teachers and fellow students.  Such dialogue is encouraged.
However, it is necessary to distinguish carefully between the student who discusses the principles underlying a problem
with others and the student who produces assignments that are identical to, or merely variations on, someone else's
work.  While it is acceptable for students in this class to discuss their programs, data sets, and reports with their
classmates, deliverables that are nearly identical to the work of others will be taken as evidence of violating the
\mbox{Honor Code}.

\section*{Summary of the Required Deliverables}

This assignment invites you to submit both a printed and an electronic version of these deliverables:

\vspace*{-.05in}
\begin{enumerate}

  \itemsep 0em
  \item Using the Javadoc standard, a commented version of the three Java classes.

  \item The output from running the final version of the {\tt SentencesReverser} program.

  \item A one-page report that responds to these prompts about the provided Java classes:

    \vspace*{-.05in}
    \begin{enumerate}
      \itemsep 0em

      \item What is the mistake that you found and fixed in the three provided Java classes?

      \item What does an instance of the {\tt Sentence} class look like in the computer's memory?

      \item How ``expensive'' is the strategy that you adopted for reversing an array?

    \end{enumerate}

  \item A one-page experiment report that comments on the timing experiments that you conducted.

\end{enumerate}

\vspace*{-.05in}

Before you turn in this assignment, you also must ensure that the course instructor has read access to your personal
Bitbucket repository that is named according to the convention {\tt cs112F2016-<your user name>}.

\end{document}
